<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>ACT I</h3>
			<h3>SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>FRANCISCO at his post. Enter to him BERNARDO</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.1">Who’s there?</a>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.2">Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.3">Long live the king!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.4">Bernardo?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.5">He.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.6">You come most carefully upon your hour.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.7">’Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.8">For this relief much thanks: ’tis bitter cold,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.9">And I am sick at heart.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.10">Have you had quiet guard?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.11">Not a mouse stirring.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.12">Well, good night.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.13">If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.14">The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.15">I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who’s there?</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.16">Friends to this ground.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.17">And liegemen to the Dane.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.18">Give you good night.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.19">O, farewell, honest soldier:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.20">Who hath relieved you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Francisco</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.21">Bernardo has my place.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.22">Give you good night.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.23">Holla! Bernardo!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.24">Say,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.25">What, is Horatio there?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.26">A piece of him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.27">Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.28">What, has this thing appear’d again to-night?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.29">I have seen nothing.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.30">Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.31">And will not let belief take hold of him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.32">Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.33">Therefore I have entreated him along</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.34">With us to watch the minutes of this night;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.35">That if again this apparition come,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.36">He may approve our eyes and speak to it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.37">Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.38">Sit down awhile;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.39">And let us once again assail your ears,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.40">That are so fortified against our story</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.41">What we have two nights seen.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.42">Well, sit we down,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.43">And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.44">Last night of all,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.45">When yond same star that’s westward from the pole</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.46">Had made his course to illume that part of heaven</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.47">Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.48">The bell then beating one⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Ghost</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.49">Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.50">In the same figure, like the king that’s dead.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.51">Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.52">Looks it not like the king? mark it, Horatio.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.53">Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.54">It would be spoke to.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.55">Question it, Horatio.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.56">What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.57">Together with that fair and warlike form</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.58">In which the majesty of buried Denmark</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.59">Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.60">It is offended.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.61">See, it stalks away!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.62">Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Ghost</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.63">’Tis gone, and will not answer.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.64">How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.65">Is not this something more than fantasy?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.66">What think you on’t?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.67">Before my God, I might not this believe</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.68">Without the sensible and true avouch</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.69">Of mine own eyes.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.70">Is it not like the king?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.71">As thou art to thyself:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.72">Such was the very armour he had on</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.73">When he the ambitious Norway combated;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.74">So frown’d he once, when, in an angry parle,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.75">He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.76">’Tis strange.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.77">Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.78">With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.79">In what particular thought to work I know not;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.80">But in the gross and scope of my opinion,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.81">This bodes some strange eruption to our state.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.82">Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.83">Why this same strict and most observant watch</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.84">So nightly toils the subject of the land,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.85">And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.86">And foreign mart for implements of war;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.87">Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.88">Does not divide the Sunday from the week;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.89">What might be toward, that this sweaty haste</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.90">Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.91">Who is’t that can inform me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.92">That can I;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.93">At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.94">Whose image even but now appear’d to us,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.95">Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.96">Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.97">Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.98">For so this side of our known world esteem’d him⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.99">Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal’d compact,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.100">Well ratified by law and heraldry,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.101">Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.102">Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.103">Against the which, a moiety competent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.104">Was gaged by our king; which had return’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.105">To the inheritance of Fortinbras,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.106">Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.107">And carriage of the article design’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.108">His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.109">Of unimproved mettle hot and full,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.110">Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.111">Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.112">For food and diet, to some enterprise</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.113">That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.114">As it doth well appear unto our state⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.115">But to recover of us, by strong hand</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.116">And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.117">So by his father lost: and this, I take it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.118">Is the main motive of our preparations,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.119">The source of this our watch and the chief head</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.120">Of this post-haste and romage in the land.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.121">I think it be no other but e’en so:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.122">Well may it sort that this portentous figure</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.123">Comes armed through our watch; so like the king</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.124">That was and is the question of these wars.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.125">A mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.126">In the most high and palmy state of Rome,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.127">A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.128">The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.129">Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.130">As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.131">Disasters in the sun; and the moist star</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.132">Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.133">Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.134">And even the like precurse of fierce events,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.135">As harbingers preceding still the fates</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.136">And prologue to the omen coming on,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.137">Have heaven and earth together demonstrated</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.138">Unto our climatures and countrymen.⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.139">But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter Ghost</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.1.140">I’ll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.141">If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.142">Speak to me:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.143">If there be any good thing to be done,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.144">That may to thee do ease and grace to me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.145">Speak to me:</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Cock crows</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.1.146">If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.147">Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.148">Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.149">Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.150">For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.151">Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.152">Shall I strike at it with my partisan?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.153">Do, if it will not stand.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.154">’Tis here!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.155">’Tis here!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.156">’Tis gone!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Ghost</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.1.157">We do it wrong, being so majestical,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.158">To offer it the show of violence;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.159">For it is, as the air, invulnerable,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.160">And our vain blows malicious mockery.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.161">It was about to speak, when the cock crew.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.162">And then it started like a guilty thing</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.163">Upon a fearful summons. I have heard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.164">The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.165">Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.166">Awake the god of day; and, at his warning,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.167">Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.168">The extravagant and erring spirit hies</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.169">To his confine: and of the truth herein</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.170">This present object made probation.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.171">It faded on the crowing of the cock.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.172">Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.173">Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.174">The bird of dawning singeth all night long:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.175">And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.176">The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.177">No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.178">So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.179">So have I heard and do in part believe it.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.180">But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.181">Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.182">Break we our watch up; and by my advice,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.183">Let us impart what we have seen to-night</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.184">Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.185">This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.186">Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.187">As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.1.188">Let’s do’t, I pray; and I this morning know</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.1.189">Where we shall find him most conveniently.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE II. A room of state in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, HAMLET, POLONIUS, LAERTES, VOLTIMAND, CORNELIUS, Lords, and Attendants</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.1">Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.2">The memory be green, and that it us befitted</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.3">To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.4">To be contracted in one brow of woe,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.5">Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.6">That we with wisest sorrow think on him,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.7">Together with remembrance of ourselves.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.8">Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.9">The imperial jointress to this warlike state,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.10">Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.11">With an auspicious and a dropping eye,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.12">With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.13">In equal scale weighing delight and dole⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.14">Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.15">Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.16">With this affair along. For all, our thanks.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.17">Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.18">Holding a weak supposal of our worth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.19">Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.20">Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.21">Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.22">He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.23">Importing the surrender of those lands</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.24">Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.25">To our most valiant brother. So much for him.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.26">Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.27">Thus much the business is: we have here writ</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.28">To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.29">Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.30">Of this his nephew’s purpose⁠—to suppress</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.31">His further gait herein; in that the levies,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.32">The lists and full proportions, are all made</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.33">Out of his subject: and we here dispatch</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.34">You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.35">For bearers of this greeting to old Norway;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.36">Giving to you no further personal power</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.37">To business with the king, more than the scope</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.38">Of these delated articles allow.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.39">Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Cornelius</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Voltimand</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.40">In that and all things will we show our duty.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.41">We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.2.42">And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.43">You told us of some suit; what is’t, Laertes?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.44">You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.45">And loose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.46">That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.47">The head is not more native to the heart,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.48">The hand more instrumental to the mouth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.49">Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.50">What wouldst thou have, Laertes?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.51">My dread lord,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.52">Your leave and favour to return to France;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.53">From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.54">To show my duty in your coronation,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.55">Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.56">My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.57">And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.58">Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.59">He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.60">By laboursome petition, and at last</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.61">Upon his will I seal’d my hard consent:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.62">I do beseech you, give him leave to go.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.63">Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.64">And thy best graces spend it at thy will!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.65">But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.66">[Aside] A little more than kin, and less than kind.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.67">How is it that the clouds still hang on you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.68">Not so, my lord; I am too much i’ the sun.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.69">Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.70">And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.71">Do not for ever with thy vailed lids</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.72">Seek for thy noble father in the dust:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.73">Thou know’st ’tis common; all that lives must die,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.74">Passing through nature to eternity.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.75">Ay, madam, it is common.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.76">If it be,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.77">Why seems it so particular with thee?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.78">Seems, madam! nay it is; I know not “seems.”</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.79">’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.80">Nor customary suits of solemn black,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.81">Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.82">No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.83">Nor the dejected ’havior of the visage,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.84">Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.85">That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.86">For they are actions that a man might play:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.87">But I have that within which passeth show;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.88">These but the trappings and the suits of woe.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.89">’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.90">To give these mourning duties to your father:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.91">But, you must know, your father lost a father;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.92">That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.93">In filial obligation for some term</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.94">To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.95">In obstinate condolement is a course</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.96">Of impious stubbornness; ’tis unmanly grief;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.97">It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.98">A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.99">An understanding simple and unschool’d:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.100">For what we know must be and is as common</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.101">As any the most vulgar thing to sense,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.102">Why should we in our peevish opposition</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.103">Take it to heart? Fie! ’tis a fault to heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.104">A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.105">To reason most absurd: whose common theme</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.106">Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.107">From the first corse till he that died to-day,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.108">“This must be so.” We pray you, throw to earth</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.109">This unprevailing woe, and think of us</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.110">As of a father: for let the world take note,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.111">You are the most immediate to our throne;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.112">And with no less nobility of love</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.113">Than that which dearest father bears his son,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.114">Do I impart toward you. For your intent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.115">In going back to school in Wittenberg,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.116">It is most retrograde to our desire:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.117">And we beseech you, bend you to remain</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.118">Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.119">Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.120">Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.121">I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.122">I shall in all my best obey you, madam.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.123">Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.124">Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.125">This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.126">Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.127">No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.128">But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.129">And the king’s rouse the heavens all bruit again,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.130">Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt all but HAMLET</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.131">O, that this too too solid flesh would melt</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.132">Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.133">Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.134">His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.135">How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.136">Seem to me all the uses of this world!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.137">Fie on’t! ah fie! ’tis an unweeded garden,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.138">That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.139">Possess it merely. That it should come to this!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.140">But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.141">So excellent a king; that was, to this,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.142">Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.143">That he might not beteem the winds of heaven</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.144">Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.145">Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.146">As if increase of appetite had grown</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.147">By what it fed on: and yet, within a month⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.148">Let me not think on’t⁠—Frailty, thy name is woman!⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.149">A little month, or ere those shoes were old</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.150">With which she follow’d my poor father’s body,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.151">Like Niobe, all tears:⁠—why she, even she⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.152">O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.153">Would have mourn’d longer⁠—married with my uncle,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.154">My father’s brother, but no more like my father</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.155">Than I to Hercules: within a month:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.156">Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.157">Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.158">She married. O, most wicked speed, to post</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.159">With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.160">It is not nor it cannot come to good:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.161">But break, my heart; for I must hold my tongue.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter HORATIO, MARCELLUS, and BERNARDO</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.162">Hail to your lordship!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.163">I am glad to see you well:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.164">Horatio⁠—or I do forget myself.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.165">The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.166">Sir, my good friend; I’ll change that name with you:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.167">And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.168">My good lord⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.169">I am very glad to see you. Good even, sir.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.170">But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.171">A truant disposition, good my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.172">I would not hear your enemy say so,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.173">Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.174">To make it truster of your own report</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.175">Against yourself: I know you are no truant.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.176">But what is your affair in Elsinore?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.177">We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.178">My lord, I came to see your father’s funeral.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.179">I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.180">I think it was to see my mother’s wedding.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.181">Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.182">Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.183">Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.184">Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.185">Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.186">My father!⁠—methinks I see my father.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.187">Where, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.188">In my mind’s eye, Horatio.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.189">I saw him once; he was a goodly king.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.190">He was a man, take him for all in all,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.191">I shall not look upon his like again.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.192">My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.193">Saw? who?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.194">My lord, the king your father.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.195">The king my father!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.196">Season your admiration for awhile</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.197">With an attent ear, till I may deliver,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.198">Upon the witness of these gentlemen,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.199">This marvel to you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.200">For God’s love, let me hear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.201">Two nights together had these gentlemen,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.202">Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.203">In the dead vast and middle of the night,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.204">Been thus encounter’d. A figure like your father,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.205">Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.206">Appears before them, and with solemn march</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.207">Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.208">By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.209">Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distilled</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.210">Almost to jelly with the act of fear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.211">Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.212">In dreadful secrecy impart they did;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.213">And I with them the third night kept the watch;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.214">Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.215">Form of the thing, each word made true and good,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.216">The apparition comes: I knew your father;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.217">These hands are not more like.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.218">But where was this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.219">My lord, upon the platform where we watch’d.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.220">Did you not speak to it?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.221">My lord, I did;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.222">But answer made it none: yet once methought</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.223">It lifted up its head and did address</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.224">Itself to motion, like as it would speak;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.225">But even then the morning cock crew loud,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.226">And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.227">And vanish’d from our sight.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.228">’Tis very strange.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.229">As I do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.230">And we did think it writ down in our duty</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.231">To let you know of it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.232">Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.233">Hold you the watch to-night?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.234">We do, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.235">Arm’d, say you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.236">Arm’d, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.237">From top to toe?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.238">My lord, from head to foot.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.239">Then saw you not his face?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.240">O, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech61">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.241">What, look’d he frowningly?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech62">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.242">A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech63">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.243">Pale or red?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech64">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.244">Nay, very pale.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech65">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.245">And fix’d his eyes upon you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech66">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.246">Most constantly.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech67">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.247">I would I had been there.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech68">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.248">It would have much amazed you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech69">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.249">Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech70">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.250">While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech71">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech72">
				<b>Bernardo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.251">Longer, longer.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech73">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.252">Not when I saw’t.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech74">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.253">His beard was grizzled⁠—no?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech75">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.254">It was, as I have seen it in his life,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.255">A sable silver’d.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech76">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.256">I will watch to-night;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.257">Perchance ’twill walk again.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech77">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.258">I warrant it will.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech78">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.259">If it assume my noble father’s person,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.260">I’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.261">And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.262">If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.263">Let it be tenable in your silence still;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.264">And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.265">Give it an understanding, but no tongue:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.266">I will requite your loves. So, fare you well:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.267">Upon the platform, ’twixt eleven and twelve,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.268">I’ll visit you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech79">
				<b>All</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.269">Our duty to your honour.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech80">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.2.270">Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt all but HAMLET</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.2.271">My father’s spirit in arms! all is not well;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.272">I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.273">Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.2.274">Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE III. A room in Polonius’ house.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter LAERTES and OPHELIA</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.1">My necessaries are embark’d: farewell:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.2">And, sister, as the winds give benefit</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.3">And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.4">But let me hear from you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.5">Do you doubt that?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.6">For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.7">Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.8">A violet in the youth of primy nature,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.9">Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.10">The perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.11">No more but so?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.12">Think it no more;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.13">For nature, crescent, does not grow alone</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.14">In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.15">The inward service of the mind and soul</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.16">Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.17">And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.18">The virtue of his will: but you must fear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.19">His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.20">For he himself is subject to his birth:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.21">He may not, as unvalued persons do,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.22">Carve for himself; for on his choice depends</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.23">The safety and health of this whole state;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.24">And therefore must his choice be circumscribed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.25">Unto the voice and yielding of that body</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.26">Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.27">It fits your wisdom so far to believe it</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.28">As he in his particular act and place</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.29">May give his saying deed; which is no further</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.30">Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.31">Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.32">If with too credent ear you list his songs,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.33">Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.34">To his unmaster’d importunity.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.35">Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.36">And keep you in the rear of your affection,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.37">Out of the shot and danger of desire.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.38">The chariest maid is prodigal enough,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.39">If she unmask her beauty to the moon:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.40">Virtue itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.41">The canker galls the infants of the spring,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.42">Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.43">And in the morn and liquid dew of youth</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.44">Contagious blastments are most imminent.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.45">Be wary then; best safety lies in fear:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.46">Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.47">I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.48">As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.49">Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.50">Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.51">Whiles, like a puff’d and reckless libertine,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.52">Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.53">And recks not his own rede.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.54">O, fear me not.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.55">I stay too long: but here my father comes.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter POLONIUS</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.3.56">A double blessing is a double grace,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.57">Occasion smiles upon a second leave.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.58">Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.59">The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.60">And you are stay’d for. There; my blessing with thee!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.61">And these few precepts in thy memory</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.62">See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.63">Nor any unproportioned thought his act.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.64">Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.65">Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.66">Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.67">But do not dull thy palm with entertainment</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.68">Of each new-hatch’d, unfledged comrade. Beware</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.69">Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.70">Bear’t that the opposed may beware of thee.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.71">Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.72">Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.73">Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.74">But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.75">For the apparel oft proclaims the man,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.76">And they in France of the best rank and station</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.77">Are of a most select and generous chief in that.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.78">Neither a borrower nor a lender be;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.79">For loan oft loses both itself and friend,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.80">And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.81">This above all: to thine ownself be true,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.82">And it must follow, as the night the day,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.83">Thou canst not then be false to any man.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.84">Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.85">Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.86">The time invites you; go; your servants tend.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.87">Farewell, Ophelia; and remember well</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.88">What I have said to you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.89">’Tis in my memory lock’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.90">And you yourself shall keep the key of it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Laertes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.91">Farewell.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.92">What is’t, Ophelia, be hath said to you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.93">So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.94">Marry, well bethought:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.95">’Tis told me, he hath very oft of late</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.96">Given private time to you; and you yourself</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.97">Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.98">If it be so, as so ’tis put on me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.99">And that in way of caution, I must tell you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.100">You do not understand yourself so clearly</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.101">As it behoves my daughter and your honour.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.102">What is between you? give me up the truth.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.103">He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.104">Of his affection to me.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.105">Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.106">Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.107">Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.108">I do not know, my lord, what I should think.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.109">Marry, I’ll teach you: think yourself a baby;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.110">That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.111">Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.112">Or⁠—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.113">Running it thus⁠—you’ll tender me a fool.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.114">My lord, he hath importuned me with love</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.115">In honourable fashion.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.116">Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.117">And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.118">With almost all the holy vows of heaven.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.119">Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.120">When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.121">Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.122">Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.123">Even in their promise, as it is a-making,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.124">You must not take for fire. From this time</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.125">Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.126">Set your entreatments at a higher rate</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.127">Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.128">Believe so much in him, that he is young</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.129">And with a larger tether may he walk</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.130">Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.131">Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.132">Not of that dye which their investments show,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.133">But mere implorators of unholy suits,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.134">Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.135">The better to beguile. This is for all:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.136">I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.137">Have you so slander any moment leisure,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.138">As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.3.139">Look to’t, I charge you: come your ways.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.3.140">I shall obey, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE IV. The platform.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter HAMLET, HORATIO, and MARCELLUS</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.1">The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.2">It is a nipping and an eager air.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.3">What hour now?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.4">I think it lacks of twelve.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.5">No, it is struck.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.6">Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.7">Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.4.8">What does this mean, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.9">The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.10">Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.11">And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.12">The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.13">The triumph of his pledge.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.14">Is it a custom?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.15">Ay, marry, is’t:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.16">But to my mind, though I am native here</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.17">And to the manner born, it is a custom</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.18">More honour’d in the breach than the observance.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.19">This heavy-headed revel east and west</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.20">Makes us traduced and tax’d of other nations:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.21">They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.22">Soil our addition; and indeed it takes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.23">From our achievements, though perform’d at height,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.24">The pith and marrow of our attribute.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.25">So, oft it chances in particular men,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.26">That for some vicious mole of nature in them,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.27">As, in their birth⁠—wherein they are not guilty,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.28">Since nature cannot choose his origin⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.29">By the o’ergrowth of some complexion,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.30">Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.31">Or by some habit that too much o’er-leavens</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.32">The form of plausive manners, that these men,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.33">Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.34">Being nature’s livery, or fortune’s star⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.35">Their virtues else⁠—be they as pure as grace,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.36">As infinite as man may undergo⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.37">Shall in the general censure take corruption</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.38">From that particular fault: the dram of eale</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.39">Doth all the noble substance of a doubt</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.40">To his own scandal.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.41">Look, my lord, it comes!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Ghost</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.42">Angels and ministers of grace defend us!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.43">Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.44">Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.45">Be thy intents wicked or charitable,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.46">Thou comest in such a questionable shape</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.47">That I will speak to thee: I’ll call thee Hamlet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.48">King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.49">Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.50">Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.51">Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.52">Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.53">Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.54">To cast thee up again. What may this mean,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.55">That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.56">Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.57">Making night hideous; and we fools of nature</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.58">So horridly to shake our disposition</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.59">With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.60">Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Ghost beckons HAMLET</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.61">It beckons you to go away with it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.62">As if it some impartment did desire</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.63">To you alone.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.64">Look, with what courteous action</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.65">It waves you to a more removed ground:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.66">But do not go with it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.67">No, by no means.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.68">It will not speak; then I will follow it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.69">Do not, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.70">Why, what should be the fear?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.71">I do not set my life in a pin’s fee;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.72">And for my soul, what can it do to that,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.73">Being a thing immortal as itself?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.74">It waves me forth again: I’ll follow it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.75">What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.76">Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.77">That beetles o’er his base into the sea,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.78">And there assume some other horrible form,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.79">Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.80">And draw you into madness? think of it:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.81">The very place puts toys of desperation,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.82">Without more motive, into every brain</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.83">That looks so many fathoms to the sea</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.84">And hears it roar beneath.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.85">It waves me still.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.86">Go on; I’ll follow thee.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.87">You shall not go, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.88">Hold off your hands.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.89">Be ruled; you shall not go.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.90">My fate cries out,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.91">And makes each petty artery in this body</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.92">As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.93">Still am I call’d. Unhand me, gentlemen.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.94">By heaven, I’ll make a ghost of him that lets me!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.4.95">I say, away! Go on; I’ll follow thee.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt Ghost and HAMLET</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.96">He waxes desperate with imagination.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.97">Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.98">Have after. To what issue will this come?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.99">Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.100">Heaven will direct it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.4.101">Nay, let’s follow him.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE V. Another part of the platform.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter GHOST and HAMLET</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.1">Where wilt thou lead me? speak; I’ll go no further.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.2">Mark me.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.3">I will.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.4">My hour is almost come,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.5">When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.6">Must render up myself.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.7">Alas, poor ghost!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.8">Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.9">To what I shall unfold.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.10">Speak; I am bound to hear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.11">So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.12">What?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.13">I am thy father’s spirit,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.14">Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.15">And for the day confined to fast in fires,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.16">Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.17">Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.18">To tell the secrets of my prison-house,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.19">I could a tale unfold whose lightest word</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.20">Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.21">Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.22">Thy knotted and combined locks to part</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.23">And each particular hair to stand on end,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.24">Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.25">But this eternal blazon must not be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.26">To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.27">If thou didst ever thy dear father love⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.28">O God!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.29">Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.30">Murder!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.31">Murder most foul, as in the best it is;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.32">But this most foul, strange and unnatural.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.33">Haste me to know’t, that I, with wings as swift</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.34">As meditation or the thoughts of love,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.35">May sweep to my revenge.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.36">I find thee apt;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.37">And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.38">That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.39">Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.40">’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.41">A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.42">Is by a forged process of my death</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.43">Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.44">The serpent that did sting thy father’s life</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.45">Now wears his crown.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.46">O my prophetic soul! My uncle!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.47">Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.48">With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.49">O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.50">So to seduce!⁠—won to his shameful lust</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.51">The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.52">O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.53">From me, whose love was of that dignity</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.54">That it went hand in hand even with the vow</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.55">I made to her in marriage, and to decline</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.56">Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.57">To those of mine!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.58">But virtue, as it never will be moved,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.59">Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.60">So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.61">Will sate itself in a celestial bed,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.62">And prey on garbage.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.63">But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.64">Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.65">My custom always of the afternoon,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.66">Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.67">With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.68">And in the porches of my ears did pour</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.69">The leperous distilment; whose effect</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.70">Holds such an enmity with blood of man</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.71">That swift as quicksilver it courses through</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.72">The natural gates and alleys of the body,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.73">And with a sudden vigour doth posset</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.74">And curd, like eager droppings into milk,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.75">The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.76">And a most instant tetter bark’d about,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.77">Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.78">All my smooth body.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.79">Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother’s hand</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.80">Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch’d:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.81">Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.82">Unhousel’d, disappointed, unanel’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.83">No reckoning made, but sent to my account</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.84">With all my imperfections on my head:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.85">O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.86">If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.87">Let not the royal bed of Denmark be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.88">A couch for luxury and damned incest.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.89">But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.90">Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.91">Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.92">And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.93">To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.94">The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.95">And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.96">Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.97">O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.98">And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.99">And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.100">But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.101">Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.102">In this distracted globe. Remember thee!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.103">Yea, from the table of my memory</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.104">I’ll wipe away all trivial fond records,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.105">All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.106">That youth and observation copied there;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.107">And thy commandment all alone shall live</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.108">Within the book and volume of my brain,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.109">Unmix’d with baser matter: yes, by heaven!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.110">O most pernicious woman!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.111">O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.112">My tables⁠—meet it is I set it down,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.113">That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.114">At least I’m sure it may be so in Denmark:</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Writing</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.5.115">So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.116">It is “Adieu, adieu! remember me.”</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.117">I have sworn ’t.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.118">[Within] My lord, my lord⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.119">[Within] Lord Hamlet⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.120">[Within] Heaven secure him!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.121">So be it!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.122">[Within] Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.123">Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.124">How is’t, my noble lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.125">What news, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.126">O, wonderful!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.127">Good my lord, tell it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.128">No; you’ll reveal it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.129">Not I, my lord, by heaven.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.130">Nor I, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.131">How say you, then; would heart of man once think it?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.132">But you’ll be secret?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.133">Ay, by heaven, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.134">There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.135">But he’s an arrant knave.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.136">There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.137">To tell us this.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.138">Why, right; you are i’ the right;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.139">And so, without more circumstance at all,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.140">I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.141">You, as your business and desire shall point you;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.142">For every man has business and desire,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.143">Such as it is; and for mine own poor part,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.144">Look you, I’ll go pray.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.145">These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.146">I’m sorry they offend you, heartily;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.147">Yes, ’faith heartily.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.148">There’s no offence, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.149">Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.150">And much offence too. Touching this vision here,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.151">It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.152">For your desire to know what is between us,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.153">O’ermaster ’t as you may. And now, good friends,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.154">As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.155">Give me one poor request.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.156">What is’t, my lord? we will.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.157">Never make known what you have seen to-night.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.158">My lord, we will not.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.159">Nay, but swear’t.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.160">In faith,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.161">My lord, not I.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.162">Nor I, my lord, in faith.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.163">Upon my sword.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>Marcellus</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.164">We have sworn, my lord, already.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.165">Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.166">[Beneath] Swear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.167">Ah, ha, boy! say’st thou so? art thou there,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.168">truepenny?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.169">Come on⁠—you hear this fellow in the cellarage⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.170">Consent to swear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.171">Propose the oath, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.172">Never to speak of this that you have seen,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.173">Swear by my sword.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.174">[Beneath] Swear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.175">Hic et ubique? then we’ll shift our ground.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.176">Come hither, gentlemen,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.177">And lay your hands again upon my sword:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.178">Never to speak of this that you have heard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.179">Swear by my sword.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.180">[Beneath] Swear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech61">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.181">Well said, old mole! canst work i’ the earth so fast?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.182">A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech62">
				<b>Horatio</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.183">O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech63">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.184">And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.185">There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.186">Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.187">Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.188">How strange or odd soe’er I bear myself,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.189">As I perchance hereafter shall think meet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.190">To put an antic disposition on,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.191">That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.192">With arms encumber’d thus, or this headshake,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.193">Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.194">As “Well, well, we know,” or “We could, an if we would,”</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.195">Or “If we list to speak,” or “There be, an if they might,”</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.196">Or such ambiguous giving out, to note</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.197">That you know aught of me: this not to do,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.198">So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech64">
				<b>Ghost</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.199">[Beneath] Swear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech65">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="1.5.200">Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>They swear</i>
				</p>
				<a name="1.5.201">So, gentlemen,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.202">With all my love I do commend me to you:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.203">And what so poor a man as Hamlet is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.204">May do, to express his love and friending to you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.205">God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.206">And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.207">The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.208">That ever I was born to set it right!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="1.5.209">Nay, come, let’s go together.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
