<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>ACT IV</h3>
			<h3>SCENE I. A room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.1">There’s matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.2">You must translate: ’tis fit we understand them.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.3">Where is your son?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.4">Bestow this place on us a little while.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.1.5">Ah, my good lord, what have I seen to-night!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.6">What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.7">Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.8">Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.9">Behind the arras hearing something stir,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.10">Whips out his rapier, cries, ‘A rat, a rat!’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.11">And, in this brainish apprehension, kills</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.12">The unseen good old man.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.13">O heavy deed!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.14">It had been so with us, had we been there:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.15">His liberty is full of threats to all;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.16">To you yourself, to us, to every one.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.17">Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer’d?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.18">It will be laid to us, whose providence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.19">Should have kept short, restrain’d and out of haunt,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.20">This mad young man: but so much was our love,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.21">We would not understand what was most fit;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.22">But, like the owner of a foul disease,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.23">To keep it from divulging, let it feed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.24">Even on the pith of Life. Where is he gone?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.25">To draw apart the body he hath kill’d:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.26">O’er whom his very madness, like some ore</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.27">Among a mineral of metals base,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.28">Shows itself pure; he weeps for what is done.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.1.29">O Gertrude, come away!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.30">The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.31">But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.32">We must, with all our majesty and skill,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.33">Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.1.34">Friends both, go join you with some further aid:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.35">Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.36">And from his mother’s closet hath he dragg’d him:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.37">Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.38">Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.1.39">Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.40">And let them know, both what we mean to do,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.41">And what’s untimely done. O, come away!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.1.42">My soul is full of discord and dismay.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE II. Another room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter HAMLET</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.1">Safely stowed.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ:</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>GUILDENSTERN:</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.2">[Within] Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.3">What noise? who calls on Hamlet?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.4">O, here they come.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.5">What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.6">Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.7">Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.8">And bear it to the chapel.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.9">Do not believe it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.10">Believe what?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.11">That I can keep your counsel and not mine own.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.12">Besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.13">replication should be made by the son of a king?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.14">Take you me for a sponge, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.15">Ay, sir, that soaks up the king’s countenance, his</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.16">rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.17">king best service in the end: he keeps them, like</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.18">an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.19">be last swallowed: when he needs what you have</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.20">gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.21">shall be dry again.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.22">I understand you not, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.23">I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.24">foolish ear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.25">My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.26">with us to the king.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.27">The body is with the king, but the king is not with</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.2.28">the body. The king is a thing⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>GUILDENSTERN</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.29">A thing, my lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.2.30">Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE III. Another room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter KING CLAUDIUS, attended</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.1">I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.2">How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.3">Yet must not we put the strong law on him:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.4">He’s loved of the distracted multitude,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.5">Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.6">And where tis so, the offender’s scourge is weigh’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.7">But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.8">This sudden sending him away must seem</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.9">Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.10">By desperate appliance are relieved,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.11">Or not at all.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter ROSENCRANTZ</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.3.12">How now! what hath befall’n?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.13">Where the dead body is bestow’d, my lord,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.14">We cannot get from him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.15">But where is he?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.16">Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.17">Bring him before us.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.18">Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter HAMLET and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.19">Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.20">At supper.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.21">At supper! where?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.22">Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.23">convocation of politic worms are e’en at him. Your</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.24">worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.25">creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.26">maggots: your fat king and your lean beggar is but</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.27">variable service, two dishes, but to one table:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.28">that’s the end.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.29">Alas, alas!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.30">A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.31">king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.32">What dost you mean by this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.33">Nothing but to show you how a king may go a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.34">progress through the guts of a beggar.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.35">Where is Polonius?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.36">In heaven; send hither to see: if your messenger</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.37">find him not there, seek him i’ the other place</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.38">yourself. But indeed, if you find him not within</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.39">this month, you shall nose him as you go up the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.40">stairs into the lobby.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.41">Go seek him there.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>To some Attendants</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.42">He will stay till ye come.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt Attendants</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.43">Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.44">Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.45">For that which thou hast done⁠—must send thee hence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.46">With fiery quickness: therefore prepare thyself;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.47">The bark is ready, and the wind at help,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.48">The associates tend, and every thing is bent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.49">For England.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.50">For England!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.51">Ay, Hamlet.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.52">Good.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.53">So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.54">I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.55">England! Farewell, dear mother.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.56">Thy loving father, Hamlet.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.57">My mother: father and mother is man and wife; man</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.58">and wife is one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.3.59">Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.60">Delay it not; I’ll have him hence to-night:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.61">Away! for every thing is seal’d and done</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.62">That else leans on the affair: pray you, make haste.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.3.63">And, England, if my love thou hold’st at aught⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.64">As my great power thereof may give thee sense,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.65">Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.66">After the Danish sword, and thy free awe</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.67">Pays homage to us⁠—thou mayst not coldly set</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.68">Our sovereign process; which imports at full,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.69">By letters congruing to that effect,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.70">The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.71">For like the hectic in my blood he rages,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.72">And thou must cure me: till I know ’tis done,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.3.73">Howe’er my haps, my joys were ne’er begun.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE IV. A plain in Denmark.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter FORTINBRAS, a Captain, and Soldiers, marching</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>PRINCE FORTINBRAS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.1">Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.2">Tell him that, by his licence, Fortinbras</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.3">Craves the conveyance of a promised march</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.4">Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.5">If that his majesty would aught with us,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.6">We shall express our duty in his eye;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.7">And let him know so.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.8">I will do’t, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>PRINCE FORTINBRAS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.9">Go softly on.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt FORTINBRAS and Soldiers</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter HAMLET, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and others</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.10">Good sir, whose powers are these?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.11">They are of Norway, sir.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.12">How purposed, sir, I pray you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.13">Against some part of Poland.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.14">Who commands them, sir?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.15">The nephews to old Norway, Fortinbras.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.16">Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.17">Or for some frontier?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.18">Truly to speak, and with no addition,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.19">We go to gain a little patch of ground</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.20">That hath in it no profit but the name.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.21">To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.22">Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.23">A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.24">Why, then the Polack never will defend it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.25">Yes, it is already garrison’d.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.26">Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.27">Will not debate the question of this straw:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.28">This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.29">That inward breaks, and shows no cause without</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.30">Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Captain</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.31">God be wi’ you, sir.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>ROSENCRANTZ</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.32">Wilt please you go, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>HAMLET</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.4.33">I’ll be with you straight go a little before.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt all except HAMLET</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.4.34">How all occasions do inform against me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.35">And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.36">If his chief good and market of his time</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.37">Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.38">Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.39">Looking before and after, gave us not</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.40">That capability and god-like reason</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.41">To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.42">Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.43">Of thinking too precisely on the event,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.44">A thought which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdom</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.45">And ever three parts coward, I do not know</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.46">Why yet I live to say ‘This thing’s to do;’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.47">Sith I have cause and will and strength and means</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.48">To do’t. Examples gross as earth exhort me:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.49">Witness this army of such mass and charge</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.50">Led by a delicate and tender prince,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.51">Whose spirit with divine ambition puff’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.52">Makes mouths at the invisible event,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.53">Exposing what is mortal and unsure</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.54">To all that fortune, death and danger dare,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.55">Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.56">Is not to stir without great argument,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.57">But greatly to find quarrel in a straw</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.58">When honour’s at the stake. How stand I then,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.59">That have a father kill’d, a mother stain’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.60">Excitements of my reason and my blood,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.61">And let all sleep? while, to my shame, I see</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.62">The imminent death of twenty thousand men,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.63">That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.64">Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.65">Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.66">Which is not tomb enough and continent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.67">To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.4.68">My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE V. Elsinore. A room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE, HORATIO, and a Gentleman</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.1">I will not speak with her.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.2">She is importunate, indeed distract:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.3">Her mood will needs be pitied.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.4">What would she have?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.5">She speaks much of her father; says she hears</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.6">There’s tricks i’ the world; and hems, and beats her heart;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.7">Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.8">That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.9">Yet the unshaped use of it doth move</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.10">The hearers to collection; they aim at it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.11">And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.12">Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.13">yield them,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.14">Indeed would make one think there might be thought,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.15">Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>HORATIO</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.16">’Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.17">Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.18">Let her come in.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit HORATIO</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.19">To my sick soul, as sin’s true nature is,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.20">Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.21">So full of artless jealousy is guilt,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.22">It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter HORATIO, with OPHELIA</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.23">Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.24">How now, Ophelia!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.25">[Sings]</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.26">How should I your true love know</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.27">From another one?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.28">By his cockle hat and staff,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.29">And his sandal shoon.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.30">Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.31">Say you? nay, pray you, mark.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Sings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.32">He is dead and gone, lady,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.33">He is dead and gone;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.34">At his head a grass-green turf,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.35">At his heels a stone.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.36">Nay, but, Ophelia⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.37">Pray you, mark.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Sings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.38">White his shroud as the mountain snow⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter KING CLAUDIUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.39">Alas, look here, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.40">[Sings]</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.41">Larded with sweet flowers</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.42">Which bewept to the grave did go</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.43">With true-love showers.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.44">How do you, pretty lady?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.45">Well, God ’ild you! They say the owl was a baker’s</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.46">daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.47">what we may be. God be at your table!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.48">Conceit upon her father.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.49">Pray you, let’s have no words of this; but when they</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.50">ask you what it means, say you this:</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Sings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.51">To-morrow is Saint Valentine’s day,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.52">All in the morning betime,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.53">And I a maid at your window,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.54">To be your Valentine.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.55">Then up he rose, and donn’d his clothes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.56">And dupp’d the chamber-door;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.57">Let in the maid, that out a maid</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.58">Never departed more.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.59">Pretty Ophelia!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.60">Indeed, la, without an oath, I’ll make an end on’t:</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Sings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.61">By Gis and by Saint Charity,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.62">Alack, and fie for shame!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.63">Young men will do’t, if they come to’t;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.64">By cock, they are to blame.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.65">Quoth she, before you tumbled me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.66">You promised me to wed.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.67">So would I ha’ done, by yonder sun,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.68">An thou hadst not come to my bed.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.69">How long hath she been thus?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.70">I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.71">cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.72">i’ the cold ground. My brother shall know of it:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.73">and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.74">coach! Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.75">good night, good night.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.76">Follow her close; give her good watch,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.77">I pray you.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit HORATIO</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.78">O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.79">All from her father’s death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.80">When sorrows come, they come not single spies</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.81">But in battalions. First, her father slain:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.82">Next, your son gone; and he most violent author</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.83">Of his own just remove: the people muddied,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.84">Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.85">For good Polonius’ death; and we have done but greenly,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.86">In hugger-mugger to inter him: poor Ophelia</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.87">Divided from herself and her fair judgment,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.88">Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.89">Last, and as much containing as all these,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.90">Her brother is in secret come from France;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.91">Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.92">And wants not buzzers to infect his ear</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.93">With pestilent speeches of his father’s death;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.94">Wherein necessity, of matter beggar’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.95">Will nothing stick our person to arraign</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.96">In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.97">Like to a murdering-piece, in many places</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.98">Gives me superfluous death.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>A noise within</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.99">Alack, what noise is this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.100">Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter another Gentleman</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.101">What is the matter?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Gentleman</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.102">Save yourself, my lord:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.103">The ocean, overpeering of his list,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.104">Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.105">Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.106">O’erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.107">And, as the world were now but to begin,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.108">Antiquity forgot, custom not known,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.109">The ratifiers and props of every word,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.110">They cry ‘Choose we: Laertes shall be king:’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.111">Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.112">‘Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.113">How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.114">O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.115">The doors are broke.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Noise within</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter LAERTES, armed; Danes following</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.116">Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Danes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.117">No, let’s come in.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.118">I pray you, give me leave.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Danes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.119">We will, we will.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>They retire without the door</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.120">I thank you: keep the door. O thou vile king,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.121">Give me my father!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.122">Calmly, good Laertes.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.123">That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.124">Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.125">Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.126">Of my true mother.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.127">What is the cause, Laertes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.128">That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.129">Let him go, Gertrude; do not fear our person:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.130">There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.131">That treason can but peep to what it would,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.132">Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.133">Why thou art thus incensed. Let him go, Gertrude.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.134">Speak, man.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.135">Where is my father?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.136">Dead.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.137">But not by him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.138">Let him demand his fill.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.139">How came he dead? I’ll not be juggled with:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.140">To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.141">Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.142">I dare damnation. To this point I stand,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.143">That both the worlds I give to negligence,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.144">Let come what comes; only I’ll be revenged</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.145">Most thoroughly for my father.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.146">Who shall stay you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.147">My will, not all the world:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.148">And for my means, I’ll husband them so well,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.149">They shall go far with little.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.150">Good Laertes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.151">If you desire to know the certainty</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.152">Of your dear father’s death, is’t writ in your revenge,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.153">That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.154">Winner and loser?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.155">None but his enemies.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.156">Will you know them then?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.157">To his good friends thus wide I’ll ope my arms;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.158">And like the kind life-rendering pelican,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.159">Repast them with my blood.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.160">Why, now you speak</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.161">Like a good child and a true gentleman.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.162">That I am guiltless of your father’s death,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.163">And am most sensible in grief for it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.164">It shall as level to your judgment pierce</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.165">As day does to your eye.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Danes</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.166">[Within] Let her come in.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.167">How now! what noise is that?</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter OPHELIA</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.168">O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.169">Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.170">By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.171">Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.172">Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.173">O heavens! is’t possible, a young maid’s wits</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.174">Should be as moral as an old man’s life?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.175">Nature is fine in love, and where ’tis fine,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.176">It sends some precious instance of itself</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.177">After the thing it loves.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.178">[Sings]</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.179">They bore him barefaced on the bier;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.180">Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.181">And in his grave rain’d many a tear:⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.182">Fare you well, my dove!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.183">Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.184">It could not move thus.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.185">[Sings]</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.186">You must sing a-down a-down,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.187">An you call him a-down-a.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.188">O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.189">steward, that stole his master’s daughter.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.190">This nothing’s more than matter.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.191">There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance; pray,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.192">love, remember: and there is pansies. that’s for thoughts.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.193">A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.194">There’s fennel for you, and columbines: there’s rue</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.195">for you; and here’s some for me: we may call it</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.196">herb-grace o’ Sundays: O you must wear your rue with</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.197">a difference. There’s a daisy: I would give you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.198">some violets, but they withered all when my father</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.199">died: they say he made a good end⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Sings</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.5.200">For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.201">Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.202">She turns to favour and to prettiness.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>OPHELIA</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.203">[Sings]</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.204">And will he not come again?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.205">And will he not come again?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.206">No, no, he is dead:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.207">Go to thy death-bed:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.208">He never will come again.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.209">His beard was as white as snow,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.210">All flaxen was his poll:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.211">He is gone, he is gone,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.212">And we cast away moan:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.213">God ha’ mercy on his soul!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.214">And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi’ ye.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech61">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.215">Do you see this, O God?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech62">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.216">Laertes, I must commune with your grief,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.217">Or you deny me right. Go but apart,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.218">Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.219">And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.220">If by direct or by collateral hand</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.221">They find us touch’d, we will our kingdom give,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.222">Our crown, our life, and all that we can ours,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.223">To you in satisfaction; but if not,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.224">Be you content to lend your patience to us,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.225">And we shall jointly labour with your soul</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.226">To give it due content.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech63">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.227">Let this be so;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.228">His means of death, his obscure funeral⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.229">No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.230">No noble rite nor formal ostentation⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.231">Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.232">That I must call’t in question.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech64">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.5.233">So you shall;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.234">And where the offence is let the great axe fall.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.5.235">I pray you, go with me.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE VI. Another room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter HORATIO and a Servant</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>HORATIO</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.1">What are they that would speak with me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Servant</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.2">Sailors, sir: they say they have letters for you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>HORATIO</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.3">Let them come in.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Servant</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.6.4">I do not know from what part of the world</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.5">I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter Sailors</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>First Sailor</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.6">God bless you, sir.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>HORATIO</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.7">Let him bless thee too.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>First Sailor</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.8">He shall, sir, an’t please him. There’s a letter for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.9">you, sir; it comes from the ambassador that was</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.10">bound for England; if your name be Horatio, as I am</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.11">let to know it is.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>HORATIO</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.6.12">[Reads] ‘Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.13">this, give these fellows some means to the king:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.14">they have letters for him. Ere we were two days old</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.15">at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.16">chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.17">a compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.18">them: on the instant they got clear of our ship; so</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.19">I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.20">me like thieves of mercy: but they knew what they</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.21">did; I am to do a good turn for them. Let the king</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.22">have the letters I have sent; and repair thou to me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.23">with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.24">have words to speak in thine ear will make thee</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.25">dumb; yet are they much too light for the bore of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.26">the matter. These good fellows will bring thee</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.27">where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.28">course for England: of them I have much to tell</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.29">thee. Farewell.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.30">‘He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.31">Come, I will make you way for these your letters;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.32">And do’t the speedier, that you may direct me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.6.33">To him from whom you brought them.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE VII. Another room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter KING CLAUDIUS and LAERTES</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.1">Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.2">And you must put me in your heart for friend,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.3">Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.4">That he which hath your noble father slain</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.5">Pursued my life.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.6">It well appears: but tell me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.7">Why you proceeded not against these feats,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.8">So crimeful and so capital in nature,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.9">As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.10">You mainly were stirr’d up.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.11">O, for two special reasons;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.12">Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.13">But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.14">Lives almost by his looks; and for myself⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.15">My virtue or my plague, be it either which⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.16">She’s so conjunctive to my life and soul,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.17">That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.18">I could not but by her. The other motive,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.19">Why to a public count I might not go,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.20">Is the great love the general gender bear him;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.21">Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.22">Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.23">Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.24">Too slightly timber’d for so loud a wind,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.25">Would have reverted to my bow again,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.26">And not where I had aim’d them.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.27">And so have I a noble father lost;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.28">A sister driven into desperate terms,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.29">Whose worth, if praises may go back again,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.30">Stood challenger on mount of all the age</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.31">For her perfections: but my revenge will come.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.32">Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.33">That we are made of stuff so flat and dull</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.34">That we can let our beard be shook with danger</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.35">And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.36">I loved your father, and we love ourself;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.37">And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter a Messenger</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.7.38">How now! what news?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Messenger</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.39">Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.40">This to your majesty; this to the queen.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.41">From Hamlet! who brought them?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Messenger</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.42">Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.43">They were given me by Claudio; he received them</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.44">Of him that brought them.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.45">Laertes, you shall hear them. Leave us.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit Messenger</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Reads</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.7.46">‘High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.47">your kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.48">your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.49">pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.50">and more strange return. HAMLET.’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.51">What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.52">Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.53">Know you the hand?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.54">’Tis Hamlets character. ‘Naked!’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.55">And in a postscript here, he says ‘alone.’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.56">Can you advise me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.57">I’m lost in it, my lord. But let him come;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.58">It warms the very sickness in my heart,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.59">That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.60">‘Thus didest thou.’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.61">If it be so, Laertes⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.62">As how should it be so? how otherwise?⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.63">Will you be ruled by me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.64">Ay, my lord;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.65">So you will not o’errule me to a peace.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.66">To thine own peace. If he be now return’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.67">As checking at his voyage, and that he means</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.68">No more to undertake it, I will work him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.69">To an exploit, now ripe in my device,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.70">Under the which he shall not choose but fall:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.71">And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.72">But even his mother shall uncharge the practise</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.73">And call it accident.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.74">My lord, I will be ruled;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.75">The rather, if you could devise it so</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.76">That I might be the organ.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.77">It falls right.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.78">You have been talk’d of since your travel much,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.79">And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.80">Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.81">Did not together pluck such envy from him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.82">As did that one, and that, in my regard,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.83">Of the unworthiest siege.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.84">What part is that, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.85">A very riband in the cap of youth,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.86">Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.87">The light and careless livery that it wears</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.88">Than settled age his sables and his weeds,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.89">Importing health and graveness. Two months since,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.90">Here was a gentleman of Normandy:⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.91">I’ve seen myself, and served against, the French,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.92">And they can well on horseback: but this gallant</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.93">Had witchcraft in’t; he grew unto his seat;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.94">And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.95">As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.96">With the brave beast: so far he topp’d my thought,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.97">That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.98">Come short of what he did.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.99">A Norman was’t?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.100">A Norman.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.101">Upon my life, Lamond.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.102">The very same.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.103">I know him well: he is the brooch indeed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.104">And gem of all the nation.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.105">He made confession of you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.106">And gave you such a masterly report</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.107">For art and exercise in your defence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.108">And for your rapier most especially,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.109">That he cried out, ’twould be a sight indeed,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.110">If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.111">He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.112">If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.113">Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.114">That he could nothing do but wish and beg</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.115">Your sudden coming o’er, to play with him.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.116">Now, out of this⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.117">What out of this, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.118">Laertes, was your father dear to you?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.119">Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.120">A face without a heart?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.121">Why ask you this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.122">Not that I think you did not love your father;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.123">But that I know love is begun by time;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.124">And that I see, in passages of proof,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.125">Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.126">There lives within the very flame of love</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.127">A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.128">And nothing is at a like goodness still;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.129">For goodness, growing to a plurisy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.130">Dies in his own too much: that we would do</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.131">We should do when we would; for this ‘would’ changes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.132">And hath abatements and delays as many</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.133">As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.134">And then this ‘should’ is like a spendthrift sigh,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.135">That hurts by easing. But, to the quick o’ the ulcer:⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.136">Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.137">To show yourself your father’s son in deed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.138">More than in words?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.139">To cut his throat i’ the church.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.140">No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.141">Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.142">Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.143">Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.144">We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.145">And set a double varnish on the fame</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.146">The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.147">And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.148">Most generous and free from all contriving,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.149">Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.150">Or with a little shuffling, you may choose</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.151">A sword unbated, and in a pass of practise</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.152">Requite him for your father.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.153">I will do’t:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.154">And, for that purpose, I’ll anoint my sword.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.155">I bought an unction of a mountebank,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.156">So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.157">Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.158">Collected from all simples that have virtue</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.159">Under the moon, can save the thing from death</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.160">That is but scratch’d withal: I’ll touch my point</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.161">With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.162">It may be death.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.163">Let’s further think of this;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.164">Weigh what convenience both of time and means</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.165">May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.166">And that our drift look through our bad performance,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.167">’Twere better not assay’d: therefore this project</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.168">Should have a back or second, that might hold,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.169">If this should blast in proof. Soft! let me see:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.170">We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha’t.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.171">When in your motion you are hot and dry⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.172">As make your bouts more violent to that end⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.173">And that he calls for drink, I’ll have prepared him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.174">A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.175">If he by chance escape your venom’d stuck,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.176">Our purpose may hold there.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE</i>
				</p>
				<a name="4.7.177">How now, sweet queen!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.178">One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.179">So fast they follow; your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.180">Drown’d! O, where?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.181">There is a willow grows aslant a brook,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.182">That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.183">There with fantastic garlands did she come</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.184">Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.185">That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.186">But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.187">There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.188">Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.189">When down her weedy trophies and herself</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.190">Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.191">And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.192">Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.193">As one incapable of her own distress,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.194">Or like a creature native and indued</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.195">Unto that element: but long it could not be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.196">Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.197">Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.198">To muddy death.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.199">Alas, then, she is drown’d?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>QUEEN GERTRUDE</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.200">Drown’d, drown’d.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>LAERTES</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.201">Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.202">And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.203">It is our trick; nature her custom holds,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.204">Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.205">The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.206">I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.207">But that this folly douts it.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>KING CLAUDIUS</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="4.7.208">Let’s follow, Gertrude:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.209">How much I had to do to calm his rage!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.210">Now fear I this will give it start again;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="4.7.211">Therefore let’s follow.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
