<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>ACT II</h3>
			<h3>SCENE I. A room in POLONIUS’ house.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter POLONIUS and REYNALDO</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.1">Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.2">I will, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.3">You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.4">Before you visit him, to make inquire</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.5">Of his behavior.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.6">My lord, I did intend it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.7">Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.8">Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.9">And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.10">What company, at what expense; and finding</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.11">By this encompassment and drift of question</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.12">That they do know my son, come you more nearer</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.13">Than your particular demands will touch it:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.14">Take you, as ’twere, some distant knowledge of him;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.15">As thus, ‘I know his father and his friends,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.16">And in part him:‘ do you mark this, Reynaldo?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.17">Ay, very well, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.18">‘And in part him; but’ you may say ‘not well:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.19">But, if’t be he I mean, he’s very wild;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.20">Addicted so and so:’ and there put on him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.21">What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.22">As may dishonour him; take heed of that;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.23">But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.24">As are companions noted and most known</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.25">To youth and liberty.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.26">As gaming, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.27">Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.28">Drabbing: you may go so far.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.29">My lord, that would dishonour him.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.30">‘Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.31">You must not put another scandal on him,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.32">That he is open to incontinency;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.33">That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.34">That they may seem the taints of liberty,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.35">The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.36">A savageness in unreclaimed blood,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.37">Of general assault.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.38">But, my good lord⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.39">Wherefore should you do this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.40">Ay, my lord,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.41">I would know that.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.42">Marry, sir, here’s my drift;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.43">And I believe, it is a fetch of wit:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.44">You laying these slight sullies on my son,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.45">As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ the working, Mark you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.46">Your party in converse, him you would sound,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.47">Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.48">The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.49">He closes with you in this consequence;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.50">‘Good sir,’ or so, or ‘friend,’ or ‘gentleman,’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.51">According to the phrase or the addition</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.52">Of man and country.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.53">Very good, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.54">And then, sir, does he this⁠—he does⁠—what was I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.55">about to say? By the mass, I was about to say</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.56">something: where did I leave?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.57">At ‘closes in the consequence,’ at ‘friend or so,’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.58">and ‘gentleman.’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.59">At ‘closes in the consequence,’ ay, marry;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.60">He closes thus: ‘I know the gentleman;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.61">I saw him yesterday, or t’ other day,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.62">Or then, or then; with such, or such; and, as you say,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.63">There was a’ gaming; there o’ertook in’s rouse;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.64">There falling out at tennis:’ or perchance,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.65">‘I saw him enter such a house of sale,’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.66">Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.67">See you now;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.68">Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.69">And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.70">With windlasses and with assays of bias,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.71">By indirections find directions out:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.72">So by my former lecture and advice,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.73">Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.74">My lord, I have.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.75">God be wi’ you; fare you well.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.76">Good my lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.77">Observe his inclination in yourself.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.78">I shall, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.79">And let him ply his music.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>Reynaldo</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.80">Well, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.81">Farewell!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit REYNALDO</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter OPHELIA</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.1.82">How now, Ophelia! what’s the matter?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.83">O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.84">With what, i’ the name of God?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.85">My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.86">Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.87">No hat upon his head; his stockings foul’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.88">Ungarter’d, and down-gyved to his ancle;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.89">Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.90">And with a look so piteous in purport</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.91">As if he had been loosed out of hell</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.92">To speak of horrors⁠—he comes before me.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.93">Mad for thy love?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.94">My lord, I do not know;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.95">But truly, I do fear it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.96">What said he?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.97">He took me by the wrist and held me hard;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.98">Then goes he to the length of all his arm;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.99">And, with his other hand thus o’er his brow,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.100">He falls to such perusal of my face</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.101">As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.102">At last, a little shaking of mine arm</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.103">And thrice his head thus waving up and down,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.104">He raised a sigh so piteous and profound</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.105">As it did seem to shatter all his bulk</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.106">And end his being: that done, he lets me go:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.107">And, with his head over his shoulder turn’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.108">He seem’d to find his way without his eyes;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.109">For out o’ doors he went without their helps,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.110">And, to the last, bended their light on me.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.111">Come, go with me: I will go seek the king.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.112">This is the very ecstasy of love,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.113">Whose violent property fordoes itself</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.114">And leads the will to desperate undertakings</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.115">As oft as any passion under heaven</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.116">That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.117">What, have you given him any hard words of late?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Ophelia</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.118">No, my good lord, but, as you did command,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.119">I did repel his fetters and denied</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.120">His access to me.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.1.121">That hath made him mad.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.122">I am sorry that with better heed and judgment</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.123">I had not quoted him: I fear’d he did but trifle,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.124">And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.125">By heaven, it is as proper to our age</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.126">To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.127">As it is common for the younger sort</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.128">To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.129">This must be known; which, being kept close, might</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.130">move</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.1.131">More grief to hide than hate to utter love.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h3>SCENE II. A room in the castle.</h3>
			<p/>
			<blockquote>
				<i>Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and Attendants</i>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech1">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.1">Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.2">Moreover that we much did long to see you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.3">The need we have to use you did provoke</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.4">Our hasty sending. Something have you heard</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.5">Of Hamlet’s transformation; so call it,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.6">Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.7">Resembles that it was. What it should be,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.8">More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.9">So much from the understanding of himself,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.10">I cannot dream of: I entreat you both,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.11">That, being of so young days brought up with him,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.12">And sith so neighbour’d to his youth and havior,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.13">That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.14">Some little time: so by your companies</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.15">To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.16">So much as from occasion you may glean,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.17">Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.18">That, open’d, lies within our remedy.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech2">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.19">Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.20">And sure I am two men there are not living</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.21">To whom he more adheres. If it will please you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.22">To show us so much gentry and good will</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.23">As to expend your time with us awhile,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.24">For the supply and profit of our hope,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.25">Your visitation shall receive such thanks</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.26">As fits a king’s remembrance.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech3">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.27">Both your majesties</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.28">Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.29">Put your dread pleasures more into command</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.30">Than to entreaty.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech4">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.31">But we both obey,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.32">And here give up ourselves, in the full bent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.33">To lay our service freely at your feet,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.34">To be commanded.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech5">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.35">Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech6">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.36">Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.37">And I beseech you instantly to visit</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.38">My too much changed son. Go, some of you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.39">And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech7">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.40">Heavens make our presence and our practises</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.41">Pleasant and helpful to him!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech8">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.42">Ay, amen!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and some Attendants</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter POLONIUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech9">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.43">The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.44">Are joyfully return’d.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech10">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.45">Thou still hast been the father of good news.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech11">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.46">Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.47">I hold my duty, as I hold my soul,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.48">Both to my God and to my gracious king:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.49">And I do think, or else this brain of mine</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.50">Hunts not the trail of policy so sure</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.51">As it hath used to do, that I have found</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.52">The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech12">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.53">O, speak of that; that do I long to hear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech13">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.54">Give first admittance to the ambassadors;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.55">My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech14">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.56">Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit POLONIUS</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.57">He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.58">The head and source of all your son’s distemper.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech15">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.59">I doubt it is no other but the main;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.60">His father’s death, and our o’erhasty marriage.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech16">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.61">Well, we shall sift him.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Re-enter POLONIUS, with VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.62">Welcome, my good friends!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.63">Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech17">
				<b>Voltimand</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.64">Most fair return of greetings and desires.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.65">Upon our first, he sent out to suppress</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.66">His nephew’s levies; which to him appear’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.67">To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.68">But, better look’d into, he truly found</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.69">It was against your highness: whereat grieved,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.70">That so his sickness, age and impotence</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.71">Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.72">On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.73">Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.74">Makes vow before his uncle never more</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.75">To give the assay of arms against your majesty.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.76">Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.77">Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.78">And his commission to employ those soldiers,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.79">So levied as before, against the Polack:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.80">With an entreaty, herein further shown,</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Giving a paper</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.81">That it might please you to give quiet pass</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.82">Through your dominions for this enterprise,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.83">On such regards of safety and allowance</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.84">As therein are set down.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech18">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.85">It likes us well;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.86">And at our more consider’d time well read,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.87">Answer, and think upon this business.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.88">Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.89">Go to your rest; at night we’ll feast together:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.90">Most welcome home!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech19">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.91">This business is well ended.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.92">My liege, and madam, to expostulate</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.93">What majesty should be, what duty is,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.94">Why day is day, night night, and time is time,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.95">Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.96">Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.97">And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.98">I will be brief: your noble son is mad:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.99">Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.100">What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.101">But let that go.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech20">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.102">More matter, with less art.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech21">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.103">Madam, I swear I use no art at all.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.104">That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.105">And pity ’tis ’tis true: a foolish figure;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.106">But farewell it, for I will use no art.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.107">Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.108">That we find out the cause of this effect,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.109">Or rather say, the cause of this defect,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.110">For this effect defective comes by cause:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.111">Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.112">I have a daughter⁠—have while she is mine⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.113">Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.114">Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Reads</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.115">‘To the celestial and my soul’s idol, the most</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.116">beautified Ophelia,’⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.117">That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; ‘beautified’ is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.118">a vile phrase: but you shall hear. Thus:</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Reads</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.119">‘In her excellent white bosom, these, &amp; c.’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech22">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.120">Came this from Hamlet to her?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech23">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.121">Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Reads</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.122">‘Doubt thou the stars are fire;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.123">Doubt that the sun doth move;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.124">Doubt truth to be a liar;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.125">But never doubt I love.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.126">‘O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.127">I have not art to reckon my groans: but that</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.128">I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.129">‘Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.130">this machine is to him, HAMLET.’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.131">This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.132">And more above, hath his solicitings,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.133">As they fell out by time, by means and place,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.134">All given to mine ear.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech24">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.135">But how hath she</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.136">Received his love?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech25">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.137">What do you think of me?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech26">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.138">As of a man faithful and honourable.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech27">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.139">I would fain prove so. But what might you think,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.140">When I had seen this hot love on the wing⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.141">As I perceived it, I must tell you that,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.142">Before my daughter told me⁠—what might you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.143">Or my dear majesty your queen here, think,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.144">If I had play’d the desk or table-book,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.145">Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.146">Or look’d upon this love with idle sight;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.147">What might you think? No, I went round to work,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.148">And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.149">‘Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.150">This must not be:’ and then I precepts gave her,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.151">That she should lock herself from his resort,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.152">Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.153">Which done, she took the fruits of my advice;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.154">And he, repulsed⁠—a short tale to make⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.155">Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.156">Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.157">Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.158">Into the madness wherein now he raves,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.159">And all we mourn for.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech28">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.160">Do you think ’tis this?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech29">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.161">It may be, very likely.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech30">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.162">Hath there been such a time⁠—I’d fain know that⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.163">That I have positively said ’Tis so,’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.164">When it proved otherwise?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech31">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.165">Not that I know.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech32">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.166">[Pointing to his head and shoulder]</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.167">Take this from this, if this be otherwise:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.168">If circumstances lead me, I will find</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.169">Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.170">Within the centre.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech33">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.171">How may we try it further?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech34">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.172">You know, sometimes he walks four hours together</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.173">Here in the lobby.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech35">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.174">So he does indeed.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech36">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.175">At such a time I’ll loose my daughter to him:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.176">Be you and I behind an arras then;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.177">Mark the encounter: if he love her not</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.178">And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.179">Let me be no assistant for a state,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.180">But keep a farm and carters.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech37">
				<b>King Claudius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.181">We will try it.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech38">
				<b>Queen Gertrude</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.182">But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech39">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.183">Away, I do beseech you, both away:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.184">I’ll board him presently.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, and Attendants</i>
				</p>
				<p>
					<i>Enter HAMLET, reading</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.185">O, give me leave:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.186">How does my good Lord Hamlet?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech40">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.187">Well, God-a-mercy.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech41">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.188">Do you know me, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech42">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.189">Excellent well; you are a fishmonger.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech43">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.190">Not I, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech44">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.191">Then I would you were so honest a man.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech45">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.192">Honest, my lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech46">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.193">Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.194">one man picked out of ten thousand.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech47">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.195">That’s very true, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech48">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.196">For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.197">god kissing carrion⁠—Have you a daughter?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech49">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.198">I have, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech50">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.199">Let her not walk i’ the sun: conception is a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.200">blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.201">Friend, look to ’t.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech51">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.202">[Aside] How say you by that? Still harping on my</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.203">daughter: yet he knew me not at first; he said I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.204">was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.205">truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.206">love; very near this. I’ll speak to him again.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.207">What do you read, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech52">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.208">Words, words, words.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech53">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.209">What is the matter, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech54">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.210">Between who?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech55">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.211">I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech56">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.212">Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.213">that old men have grey beards, that their faces are</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.214">wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.215">plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.216">wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.217">though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.218">I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.219">yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.220">you could go backward.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech57">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.221">[Aside] Though this be madness, yet there is method</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.222">in ’t. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech58">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.223">Into my grave.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech59">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.224">Indeed, that is out o’ the air.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Aside</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.225">How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.226">that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.227">could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.228">leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.229">meeting between him and my daughter.⁠—My honourable</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.230">lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech60">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.231">You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.232">more willingly part withal: except my life, except</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.233">my life, except my life.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech61">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.234">Fare you well, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech62">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.235">These tedious old fools!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech63">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.236">You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech64">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.237">[To POLONIUS] God save you, sir!</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit POLONIUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech65">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.238">My honoured lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech66">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.239">My most dear lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech67">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.240">My excellent good friends! How dost thou,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.241">Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech68">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.242">As the indifferent children of the earth.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech69">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.243">Happy, in that we are not over-happy;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.244">On fortune’s cap we are not the very button.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech70">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.245">Nor the soles of her shoe?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech71">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.246">Neither, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech72">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.247">Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.248">her favours?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech73">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.249">‘Faith, her privates we.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech74">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.250">In the secret parts of fortune? O, most true; she</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.251">is a strumpet. What’s the news?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech75">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.252">None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech76">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.253">Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.254">Let me question more in particular: what have you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.255">my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.256">that she sends you to prison hither?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech77">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.257">Prison, my lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech78">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.258">Denmark’s a prison.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech79">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.259">Then is the world one.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech80">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.260">A goodly one; in which there are many confines,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.261">wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o’ the worst.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech81">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.262">We think not so, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech82">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.263">Why, then, ’tis none to you; for there is nothing</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.264">either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.265">it is a prison.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech83">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.266">Why then, your ambition makes it one; ’tis too</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.267">narrow for your mind.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech84">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.268">O God, I could be bounded in a nut shell and count</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.269">myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.270">have bad dreams.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech85">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.271">Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.272">substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech86">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.273">A dream itself is but a shadow.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech87">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.274">Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.275">quality that it is but a shadow’s shadow.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech88">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.276">Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.277">outstretched heroes the beggars’ shadows. Shall we</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.278">to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech89">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<a name="speech90">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.279">We’ll wait upon you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech91">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.280">No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.281">of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.282">man, I am most dreadfully attended. But, in the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.283">beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech92">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.284">To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech93">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.285">Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.286">thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.287">too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.288">your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.289">deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech94">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.290">What should we say, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech95">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.291">Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You were sent</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.292">for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.293">which your modesties have not craft enough to colour:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.294">I know the good king and queen have sent for you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech96">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.295">To what end, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech97">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.296">That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.297">the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.298">our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.299">love, and by what more dear a better proposer could</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.300">charge you withal, be even and direct with me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.301">whether you were sent for, or no?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech98">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.302">[Aside to GUILDENSTERN] What say you?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech99">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.303">[Aside] Nay, then, I have an eye of you.⁠—If you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.304">love me, hold not off.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech100">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.305">My lord, we were sent for.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech101">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.306">I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.307">prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.308">and queen moult no feather. I have of late⁠—but</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.309">wherefore I know not⁠—lost all my mirth, forgone all</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.310">custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.311">with my disposition that this goodly frame, the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.312">earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.313">excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.314">o’erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.315">with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.316">me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.317">What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.318">how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.319">express and admirable! in action how like an angel!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.320">in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.321">world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.322">what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.323">me: no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.324">you seem to say so.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech102">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.325">My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech103">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.326">Why did you laugh then, when I said ‘man delights not me’?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech104">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.327">To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.328">lenten entertainment the players shall receive from</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.329">you: we coted them on the way; and hither are they</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.330">coming, to offer you service.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech105">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.331">He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.332">shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.333">shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.334">sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.335">in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.336">lungs are tickled o’ the sere; and the lady shall</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.337">say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.338">for’t. What players are they?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech106">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.339">Even those you were wont to take delight in, the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.340">tragedians of the city.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech107">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.341">How chances it they travel? their residence, both</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.342">in reputation and profit, was better both ways.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech108">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.343">I think their inhibition comes by the means of the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.344">late innovation.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech109">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.345">Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.346">in the city? are they so followed?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech110">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.347">No, indeed, are they not.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech111">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.348">How comes it? do they grow rusty?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech112">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.349">Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.350">there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.351">that cry out on the top of question, and are most</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.352">tyrannically clapped for’t: these are now the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.353">fashion, and so berattle the common stages⁠—so they</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.354">call them⁠—that many wearing rapiers are afraid of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.355">goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech113">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.356">What, are they children? who maintains ’em? how are</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.357">they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.358">longer than they can sing? will they not say</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.359">afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.360">players⁠—as it is most like, if their means are no</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.361">better⁠—their writers do them wrong, to make them</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.362">exclaim against their own succession?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech114">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.363">‘Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.364">the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.365">controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.366">for argument, unless the poet and the player went to</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.367">cuffs in the question.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech115">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.368">Is’t possible?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech116">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.369">O, there has been much throwing about of brains.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech117">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.370">Do the boys carry it away?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech118">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.371">Ay, that they do, my lord; Hercules and his load too.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech119">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.372">It is not very strange; for mine uncle is king of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.373">Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.374">my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.375">hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.376">‘Sblood, there is something in this more than</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.377">natural, if philosophy could find it out.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Flourish of trumpets within</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech120">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.378">There are the players.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech121">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.379">Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.380">come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.381">and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.382">lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.383">must show fairly outward, should more appear like</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.384">entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.385">uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech122">
				<b>Guildenstern</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.386">In what, my dear lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech123">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.387">I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.388">southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter POLONIUS</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech124">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.389">Well be with you, gentlemen!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech125">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.390">Hark you, Guildenstern; and you too: at each ear a</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.391">hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.392">out of his swaddling-clouts.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech126">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.393">Happily he’s the second time come to them; for they</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.394">say an old man is twice a child.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech127">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.395">I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.396">mark it. You say right, sir: o’ Monday morning;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.397">’twas so indeed.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech128">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.398">My lord, I have news to tell you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech129">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.399">My lord, I have news to tell you.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.400">When Roscius was an actor in Rome⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech130">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.401">The actors are come hither, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech131">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.402">Buz, buz!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech132">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.403">Upon mine honour⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech133">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.404">Then came each actor on his ass⁠—</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech134">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.405">The best actors in the world, either for tragedy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.406">comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.407">historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.408">comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.409">poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.410">Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.411">liberty, these are the only men.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech135">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.412">O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech136">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.413">What a treasure had he, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech137">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.414">Why,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.415">‘One fair daughter and no more,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.416">The which he loved passing well.’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech138">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.417">[Aside] Still on my daughter.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech139">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.418">Am I not i’ the right, old Jephthah?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech140">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.419">If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.420">that I love passing well.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech141">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.421">Nay, that follows not.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech142">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.422">What follows, then, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech143">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.423">Why,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.424">‘As by lot, God wot,’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.425">and then, you know,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.426">‘It came to pass, as most like it was,’⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.427">the first row of the pious chanson will show you</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.428">more; for look, where my abridgement comes.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Enter four or five Players</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.429">You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. I am glad</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.430">to see thee well. Welcome, good friends. O, my old</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.431">friend! thy face is valenced since I saw thee last:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.432">comest thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.433">lady and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.434">nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.435">altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.436">apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.437">ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We’ll e’en</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.438">to’t like French falconers, fly at any thing we see:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.439">we’ll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.440">of your quality; come, a passionate speech.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech144">
				<b>First Player</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.441">What speech, my lord?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech145">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.442">I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.443">never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.444">play, I remember, pleased not the million; ’twas</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.445">caviare to the general: but it was⁠—as I received</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.446">it, and others, whose judgments in such matters</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.447">cried in the top of mine⁠—an excellent play, well</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.448">digested in the scenes, set down with as much</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.449">modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.450">were no sallets in the lines to make the matter</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.451">savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.452">indict the author of affectation; but called it an</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.453">honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.454">much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.455">chiefly loved: ’twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido; and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.456">thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.457">Priam’s slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.458">at this line: let me see, let me see⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.459">‘The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,’⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.460">it is not so:⁠—it begins with Pyrrhus:⁠—</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.461">‘The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.462">Black as his purpose, did the night resemble</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.463">When he lay couched in the ominous horse,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.464">Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.465">With heraldry more dismal; head to foot</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.466">Now is he total gules; horridly trick’d</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.467">With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.468">Baked and impasted with the parching streets,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.469">That lend a tyrannous and damned light</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.470">To their lord’s murder: roasted in wrath and fire,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.471">And thus o’er-sized with coagulate gore,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.472">With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.473">Old grandsire Priam seeks.’</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.474">So, proceed you.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech146">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.475">‘Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.476">good discretion.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech147">
				<b>First Player</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.477">‘Anon he finds him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.478">Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.479">Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.480">Repugnant to command: unequal match’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.481">Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.482">But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.483">The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.484">Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.485">Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.486">Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear: for, lo! his sword,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.487">Which was declining on the milky head</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.488">Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ the air to stick:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.489">So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.490">And like a neutral to his will and matter,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.491">Did nothing.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.492">But, as we often see, against some storm,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.493">A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.494">The bold winds speechless and the orb below</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.495">As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.496">Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus’ pause,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.497">Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.498">And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.499">On Mars’s armour forged for proof eterne</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.500">With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.501">Now falls on Priam.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.502">Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.503">In general synod take away her power;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.504">Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.505">And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.506">As low as to the fiends!’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech148">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.507">This is too long.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech149">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.508">It shall to the barber’s, with your beard. Prithee,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.509">say on: he’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.510">sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech150">
				<b>First Player</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.511">‘But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen⁠—’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech151">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.512">‘The mobled queen?’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech152">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.513">That’s good; ‘mobled queen’ is good.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech153">
				<b>First Player</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.514">‘Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.515">With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.516">Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.517">About her lank and all o’er-teemed loins,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.518">A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.519">Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.520">’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.521">pronounced:</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.522">But if the gods themselves did see her then</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.523">When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.524">In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.525">The instant burst of clamour that she made,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.526">Unless things mortal move them not at all,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.527">Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.528">And passion in the gods.’</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech154">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.529">Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.530">tears in’s eyes. Pray you, no more.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech155">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.531">’Tis well: I’ll have thee speak out the rest soon.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.532">Good my lord, will you see the players well</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.533">bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.534">they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.535">time: after your death you were better have a bad</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.536">epitaph than their ill report while you live.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech156">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.537">My lord, I will use them according to their desert.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech157">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.538">God’s bodykins, man, much better: use every man</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.539">after his desert, and who should ’scape whipping?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.540">Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.541">they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.542">Take them in.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech158">
				<b>Lord Polonius</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.543">Come, sirs.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech159">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.544">Follow him, friends: we’ll hear a play to-morrow.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit POLONIUS with all the Players but the First</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.545">Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.546">Murder of Gonzago?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech160">
				<b>First Player</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.547">Ay, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech161">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.548">We’ll ha’t to-morrow night. You could, for a need,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.549">study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.550">I would set down and insert in’t, could you not?</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech162">
				<b>First Player</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.551">Ay, my lord.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech163">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.552">Very well. Follow that lord; and look you mock him</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.553">not.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit First Player</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.554">My good friends, I’ll leave you till night: you are</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.555">welcome to Elsinore.</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech164">
				<b>Rosencrantz</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.556">Good my lord!</a>
				<br/>
			</blockquote>
			<a name="speech165">
				<b>Hamlet</b>
			</a>
			<blockquote>
				<a name="2.2.557">Ay, so, God be wi’ ye;</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN</i>
				</p>
				<a name="2.2.558">Now I am alone.</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.559">O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.560">Is it not monstrous that this player here,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.561">But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.562">Could force his soul so to his own conceit</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.563">That from her working all his visage wann’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.564">Tears in his eyes, distraction in’s aspect,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.565">A broken voice, and his whole function suiting</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.566">With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.567">For Hecuba!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.568">What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.569">That he should weep for her? What would he do,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.570">Had he the motive and the cue for passion</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.571">That I have? He would drown the stage with tears</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.572">And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.573">Make mad the guilty and appal the free,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.574">Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.575">The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.576">A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.577">Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.578">And can say nothing; no, not for a king,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.579">Upon whose property and most dear life</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.580">A damn’d defeat was made. Am I a coward?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.581">Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.582">Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.583">Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i’ the throat,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.584">As deep as to the lungs? who does me this?</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.585">Ha!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.586">‘Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.587">But I am pigeon-liver’d and lack gall</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.588">To make oppression bitter, or ere this</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.589">I should have fatted all the region kites</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.590">With this slave’s offal: bloody, bawdy villain!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.591">Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.592">O, vengeance!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.593">Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.594">That I, the son of a dear father murder’d,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.595">Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.596">Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.597">And fall a-cursing, like a very drab,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.598">A scullion!</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.599">Fie upon’t! foh! About, my brain! I have heard</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.600">That guilty creatures sitting at a play</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.601">Have by the very cunning of the scene</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.602">Been struck so to the soul that presently</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.603">They have proclaim’d their malefactions;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.604">For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.605">With most miraculous organ. I’ll have these players</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.606">Play something like the murder of my father</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.607">Before mine uncle: I’ll observe his looks;</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.608">I’ll tent him to the quick: if he but blench,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.609">I know my course. The spirit that I have seen</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.610">May be the devil: and the devil hath power</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.611">To assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.612">Out of my weakness and my melancholy,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.613">As he is very potent with such spirits,</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.614">Abuses me to damn me: I’ll have grounds</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.615">More relative than this: the play’s the thing</a>
				<br/>
				<a name="2.2.616">Wherein I’ll catch the conscience of the king.</a>
				<br/>
				<p>
					<i>Exit</i>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
